---
layout: post
title: What I got from contributing to OSS
tags: [mozilla]
---

There are a lot of good altruistic reasons to contribute to Open Source Software, but this post focuses on my selfish reasons.

### Learning Projects

I'm OK at reading books, implementing examples and doing exercises, but when it comes to thinking about good projects to get my hands dirty and implement stuff, I had a lot of trouble thinking of stuff to do. OSS provides an endless supply of bugs, projects and features to work on.

### Code Reviews

Before I got started on OSS, the only person who ever really read my code was myself. Every patch I submitted to Mozilla was reviewed by at least one person, and that really improved my code. From running a Python linter plugin in Emacs to learning idiomatic ways of writing expressions, I learned a lot of good habits.

### Mentoring

Whenever I was working on a bug, I could ask for help and someone would always answer, no matter if it was a problem specific to a bug or a general language/module/tool question. This way I was able to accomplish things that were unimaginable to me before.

### Users

Knowing someone is using a feature/tool I wrote is an amazing feeling. Even bug reports make me happy! I cherish every IRC mention of my projects.

### Experience

Before I got started with OSS, all of my programming experience came from books and small projects. Contributing to OSS I got a chance to work on larger codebases, work with other people and play with technologies that I wouldn't get to play by myself.

### Community

I'm now part of a very friendly community, full of people that I respect, like and trust. They help me a lot, and sometimes I even get to help back!

### Confidence

I used to be very afraid of not being good enough to contribute to OSS. I was not sure I was a real programmer. There were several bugs that I was completely sure I would not be able to fix, until I fixed them. Now I look back at what I did and I feel proud. I feel like maybe I really am a programmer.
